Add Customize Developer Catalog Categories enhancement (#508)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/console/catalog-categories.md

  - TBD
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2020-10-22
last-updated: 2020-10-22
status: implementable
---

# Customize Developer Catalog Categories

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

The OpenShift Console provides a "Developer Catalog" which enables the user to create apps and services based on Operator backed services, helm charts, templates, etc.

Cluster admins can provide additional catalog items by installing operators or adding helm repositories. But the filter categories (All Items, Languages, Databases, Middleware, ...) are hard coded. This enhancement enable cluster admin to customize these category filters.

## Motivation

Customers who provide their own catalog items would like to customize the category filters such that they better represent their catalog items and make it easier for developers to navigate the catalog.

### Goals

> - Extract the Developer Catalog categories into a CRD to allow cluster admins to customize them.

Reviewer: This makes it sound like we're creating a new CRD instead of just updating the console config. I'd probably phrase it just to say we're adding a configuration option for customizing the categories.

Author: Updated this to

- Add configuration options to allow cluster admins to customize catalog categories.
- Provide a list of default values to the admin

### Non-Goals

- Hiding categories based on the available catalog items.
- Introducing a UI to configure this categories without a yaml editor.

## Proposal

### Extending the Console CRD

Extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. It provides already a `spec.customization` area where we can add a list of available categories.

Each category could have a list of subcategories which enables the Developer Catalog to build a 2 level tree based on this data:

```
├── Languages
│   ├── Java
│   ├── JavaScript
│   └── ...
├── Databases
├── Middleware
│   ├── Integration
│   ├── Process Automation
│   └── ...
└── ...
```

Each Category and Subcategories matches following schema:

* `id: string`, identifier used in the URL to enable deeplinking in console
* `label: string`, category display label

> * `disabled: boolean`, flag to hide this category from the sidebar so that the admin is not required to remove a complete section to hide an unused category

Reviewer: We typically don't have this flag in our APIs. The presence of an item indicates whether something is enabled or not.

I'd assume if a category doesn't have any items it's already hidden in the UI. If this is what you mean by unused, it might be taken care of already.

Author: I removed this disabled flag. The overall proposal changed a little bit to simplify things.

We can keep the existing default categories in the dev console code and will use them as fallback if there is no customization available. This makes upgrades / downgrades easier, as well we don't need to keep disabled categories in the CRD.

Christian comes with the idea of providing a code snippet to restore the current defaults when editing the `Console` CRD. Wdyt?

* `tags: string[]`, the list of item tags this category will match

Categories on the first level contains also a list of subcategories:

* `subcategories:` a list of Categories

> If a category has subcategories the dev console will show all tags from a selected category and all subcategories.

Reviewer: If an item has a tag from the top-level categories, but doesn't match any tags from the subcategories, what is the behavior?

Author: The idea is that a (top level) category shows all items which are shown when you go through all subcategories.

For example:
```
├── Languages
│   ├── Java (tags: java)
│   └── Go (tags: go)
```

If you select languages we want show both languages without the need to add both tags also to "Languages". Wdyt?

So the final yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  annotations:
    release.openshift.io/create-only: 'true'
  name: cluster
  ...
spec:
  customization:
    brand: online

>     devcatalog:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    developerCatalog:
```

Author: Changed. Did you think we should keep `developerCatalog.categories`?
Or maybe more structured `developer.catalog.categories`?
Or in a case when thinking about one catalog for both sides maybe only `catalog.categories`?

But changed this to your recommendation for now. Thanks

>       categories:

Reviewer: Does this completely replace the categories or just add new categories?

Author: Updated the document that we use the hard coded version OR the customization version. Ok?

      - id: languages
        label: Languages
        disabled: false
        tags: [go]
        subcategories:
        - id: java
          label: Java
          tags: [java]
        - id: javascript
          tags: [javascript, nodejs, js]
  ...
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a admin, I want to add, update or remove some of the catalog categories.

#### Story 2

As a user, I want to use the configured catalog categories in the Developer Catalog.

### Risks and Mitigations

## Open Questions

- [ ] Is the `Console` CRD the best option, or should we create a new `ConsoleCategory` CRD instead? Pro and con: Operators can provide CRs
- [ ] How can we provide a default list. Can we automatically create it when there is currently no devcatalog categories defined? So the admin can restore the default value by removing the current configuration?

### Test Plan

Testing will be carried out with the usual Console unit and e2e test suites.

### Graduation Criteria

None

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> When updating to 4.7 we need to ensure that the default types was automatically added to the existing Console CR.

Reviewer: It's probably simpler to just hard code the defaults in the console code and use those if the stanza isn't present in the config CR. This is better as well if we add new default categories later, which would be hard if we add the defaults to the config CR.

Author: Yep, your rigtht. I changed the proposal to keep the hard coded default values in console and "just" allow the admin to override this default so that we use the CR or static version. No merging. No migrating.

Downgrading from 4.7 to an earlier version would ignore this additional field and would show the old static categories to the user.

### Version Skew Strategy

> TODO: Christoph

## Implementation History

None

## Drawbacks

> - A bigger `Console` CR must fetches by the console before the Developer Catalog is opened.

Reviewer: We wouldn't be fetching the CR in the frontend code. The operator will watch the config, and then wire through the values to the console backend through its config map in the openshift-console namespace.

Author: Thanks :+1: Changed the document to make it clear that the frontend reads the data from the ConfigMap.

## Motivation

Customers who provide their own catalog items would like to customize the category filters such that they better represent their catalog items and make it easier for developers to navigate the catalog.

### Goals

- Add configuration options to allow cluster admins to customize catalog categories.
- Provide a list of default values to the admin

### Non-Goals

- Hiding categories based on the available catalog items.
- Introducing a UI to configure this categories without a yaml editor.

## Proposal

### Extending the Console CRD

Extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console` CRD. It provides already a `spec.customization` area where we can add a list of available categories.

Each category could have a list of subcategories which enables the Developer Catalog to build a 2 level tree based on this data:

```
├── Customer Name
│   ├── Project/Team A
│   ├── Project/Team B
│   └── ...
├── Languages
│   ├── Java
│   ├── JavaScript
│   └── ...
├── Databases
├── Middleware
│   ├── Integration
│   ├── Process Automation
│   └── ...
└── ...
```

> Each Category and Subcategories matches following schema:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each Category and Subcategory conforms to the following schema:
```

- `subcategories:` a list of child categories

If the user selects a top-level category the tags of the top-level category and all subcategories are merged, so that the parent category contains all catalog items of all subcategories.

So the final yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata:
  annotations:
    release.openshift.io/create-only: 'true'
  name: cluster
  ...
spec:
  customization:
    brand: online
    developerCatalog:
      categories:
      - id: languages
        label: Languages
        tags: [go]
        subcategories:
        - id: java
          label: Java
          tags: [java]
        - id: javascript
          tags: [javascript, nodejs, js]
  ...
```

### Fetching data from ConfigMap

An update to the `Console` CR will update the console deployment and update a corresponding `ConfigMap`.

The console will read this customization from the `ConfigMap` "console-config" (in namespace "openshift-console").

If there is any categories defined in the ConfigMap this will override the predefined (static) list of categories. The two lists are not merged.

### Provide a code snippet in YAML editor

> The admin needs to know the current default categories to customize them. We don't want provide this defaults in the CRD so that we can change these defaults later without migrating the customer data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The admin needs to know the current default categories to customize them. We don't want to provide the default categories in the CR so that we can change these defaults later without migrating the customer data.
```

> To provide the default values close to the editor, console will provide a code snippet in the sidebar of the `Console` CRD YAML editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide the default values close to the editor, the console will provide a code snippet in the sidebar of the YAML editor when editing the `Console` operator config.
```

### Upgrade process

> Keeping the default categories in the console makes up- and downgrades much easier:

Author: Changed
